the Israeli Army has stepped up its
operations in Northern Gaza pounding the
area with air strikes and encircling
Gaza City Israel Defense Forces are
expected to enter the city soon they
have been preparing for urban Warfare
with the islamis militant group Hamas
which is likely to lead to a sharp rise
in casualties the Israeli troops have
already severed Gaza City from the south
of the
territory for more I'm now joined by DW
correspondent Ben fulan who is in
Jerusalem Ben it is one month now since
Hamas terrorists attacked Israel
murdered more than 1,400 people and
abducted more than 230 people to Gaza
how are Israelis remembering
today uh it's a going to be a a day of
mixed feelings a full day of remembrance
with flags flying at half master right
now I'm just a stone throw away from the
gates to East Jerusalem to the old city
where there will be uh vigils held by
Palestinians and Israelis uh together to
remember all those who've died so far
during this conflict but I'm right in
front of one of the uh vigils where
people have been lighting candles just
moments ago uh and you can see the
posters of those who were
kidnapped uh but as I say there are also
this is going to be a day of feelings
there are also going to be protests
protests outside the entrance to the
knesset the parliament people are also
angry about the government's response
also the government's uh performance
leading up until this time the uh
surveillance records of the government
and uh the fact that there were security
lapses and that this happened at all
security lapses to say the least uh
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu has
expressed openness at least in theory to
Tactical pauses can you tell us anything
more about
that well uh the general mood here is
also for no ceasefire and Mr Netanyahu
has made that extremely clear this talk
of there being a temporary truce or a
humanitarian pause uh is really only
talk at the moment uh there have been
demands from uh Arab leaders for this uh
but until all hostages are returned uh
this is not going to be on the table as
far as Mr Netanyahu goes in an interview
uh with the US uh News Network ABC
Netanyahu made significant comments
about Gaza let's listen in those who
don't want to uh continue the way of
Hamas it certainly is not I think Israel
will
for an indefinite period will have the
overall uh security respons ibility
because we've seen what happens when we
don't have it when we don't have that
security responsibility what we have is
the eruption of uh Hamas Terror on a
scale that we couldn't imagine Ben
Netanyahu there saying the country will
take responsibility over the Gaza Strip
after destroying Hamas what exactly does
he
mean this is the most interesting
development we've had in days as far as
uh the political side of this debate
goes and it's the first time we've heard
any sort of mention from Netanyahu about
a plan the day after the day after the
war that is because there's been a lot
of criticism uh as to uh netanyahu's
response sending in these forces now in
full force but without a plan for what's
going to happen afterwards the
Palestinian Authority which is in a very
weak position right now has been
suggested by US Secretary of State
blinken to uh be revived revitalized and
to Take Over Control of the Gaza Strip
there are a lot of doubts about whether
or not it can do that the other
suggestion has been uh a group of
countries and international agencies to
provide governance and security for the
Gaza Strip but as you heard there it
sounds like Benjamin Netanyahu wants to
do
that that is DW's Ben fulan reporting
from Jerusalem many thanks
Ben I'd like to now welcome Frank
ledwidge a senior lecturer in strategic
studies at Portsmouth University and a
former UK Military Intelligence officer
Frank uh Israeli troops have encircled
Gaza City and are preparing to push into
the city center do we have any idea how
many Hamas Fighters they're expecting to
confront
there well good morning Michael I think
we don't have an idea of that but I'm
absolutely certain that there is
probably fairly fairly accurate assess
assessment on the part of the
Intelligence Officers of the 36th
division of the Israeli Army the most
powerful armored unit they have uh who
are about to enter so I can't really
speculate on that the overall context is
that there are 20 or 30,000 within Gaza
The Enclave itself but there's no way of
telling how many in Gaza City I would
suspect there are going to be a fairly
High number as I will want to make a
stand the Israeli uh projection is that
this particular phase of the operation
for Gaza City will take months not
weeks it is in fact existential for uh
Hamas so I take your point um Israel's
made it repeatedly clear their goal is
the destruction of Hamas in particular
its leadership and their headquarters in
Gaza City does the IDF believe Hamas
leaders are in fact still
there they say that they have over the
last four weeks or so probably the last
two weeks really killed in the region of
30 senior commanders that's Brigade
commanders that's commanders of about 3
or 400 and Battalion commanders 100 or
so the numbers are different than
Western armies which would indicate that
they do uh believe that some of the
leadership is there now one of the
functions of cordoning off that the
northern Gaza area into the northern
sector of operations is to seal off
Hamas leadership and of course personnel
who are already there and kill them or
capture them I suppose in some cases and
I have no doubt at all that the
assumption is that there there is
significant elements of Hamas leadership
there of course the overall leadership
is in Qatar although there are
operational commanders Dave for example
who are still certainly in Gaza now the
Israeli Army is advancing into the city
with the 36th division we understand
some of the best trained Personnel in
the IDF what more can you tell us about
this division
it's one of the older units in the
Israeli Army it's a what the Americans
would call a stored unit with battle
oners going way back into the 50s and
and late 40s I think but I think it's
important to Bear one thing in mind Orly
many things really but one thing
particularly is the power of this of
this unit so to put things in context it
has combat power comparable combat power
not numbers here so the numbers probably
between 10 and 20,000 plus support and
Logistics SS but the combat power is
similar to that of the British army so
that one division there eight or nine
reserve and regular divisions in the
Israeli Army divided into brigades but
the 36th division has combat power
equivalent to the British army so when
you see those pictures of these all
inspiring shock and or barges not only
from the artillery that's what you're
seeing you're seeing the power of a
large modern well equipped Army and its
most powerful division about to go into
action like I say just to stress by
Western European standards it's an
extremely powerful unit very well
equipped Frank I'm curious uh if the
Israeli Army succeeds in taking over
Gaza City what does it mean for the
progress of this war is it essentially
over or will they face something like
what the American forces confronted
after toppling Baghdad a smattering but
persistent resistance of Guerilla forces
hiding among the local population
I have no doubt whatsoever that they
will and this fed into the decision by
Netanyahu I think over the last or
expressed over the last day to for
Israel to take control of this because
there's no appetite whatsoever on the
part of the Arab countries who talk a
great game but do very little with
respect to Security in that particular
region and even less I think with the
British the French and the Americans who
I think have had quite enough of
occupying hostile areas in the Middle
East so essentially left only the
Israelis and of course the Israelis will
be facing undoubtedly as you put it
dister Guerilla action when and if well
when they they they take this area the
question for me and I don't know the
answer to this is what as you said what
will they do then will they then start
grinding South will they start
incrementally going South to put a huge
pressure of course on the population and
resources we don't know the answer to
that yet but for now the question is how
long will this take the answer is this
phase
months reminds me of what former
Secretary of State Coen pal said he said
you break it you own it when he was
talking about Iraq of course that is a
Frank ledwich senior lecturer in
strategic studies at Portsmouth
University and a former UK Military
Intelligence officer many thanks as
always
Frank thank you
Michael let's now bring in Shaya low a
communication adviser with the Norwegian
Refugee Council based in Jerusalem
Shaina the UN chief Antonio gues says
nowhere is safe in Gaza very few would
know this better than your own team on
the ground there what are they telling
you so we have a staff of 54 trapped
inside of Gaza most of our staff has
fled from the north to the center and
south of Gaza but as as you said no safe
no place is safe uh just this morning I
spoke to my colleague Yousef who's in KH
Unis who told me that there was an air
strike on a building very close to where
he was sleeping uh around 6:00 a.m. this
morning uh day after day we are hearing
from our colleagues that who even those
who have fled that the south is not safe
uh we've had colleagues lose family
members in the South including one of
our colleagues Amal whose seven-year-old
son khed was killed in an air strike on
Rafa a couple of weeks ago uh and and
what we're hearing in addition is not
just is it not safe in the South but
similar to the north people now are
struggling to find basic necessities uh
food clean water
um uh even waiting in line five six
hours a day just to get half a portion
of
bread um the Palestinian uh red crescent
uh says that Aid deliveries into Gaza
are much lower now than before the war
I'm afraid it's a question we'll keep
asking until there's significant change
on the ground but how dire is
humanitarian situation
today each day it seems to be getting
worse and worse just two days ago I
spoke to a couple of my colleagues who
told me that they hadn't been able to
find any water that day and were res
resorting to drinking Cola because they
had no Alternatives um we are struggling
Even in our Aid distribution that we're
working on to find water and procure
water to distribute to those who have
been internally displaced day after day
we're hearing that it's getting to be
even more of a struggle to find these
basic Goods um and until there's a a
huge ramping up of the assistance going
into Gaza people in in throughout all of
Gaza are going to continue to suffer the
important thing also to note is while we
need a huge increase in the amount of
Aid going in I think we had 90 true
trucks yesterday which still fell short
of the 100 trucks minimum that the UN
has said is needed uh in Gaza is we need
uh fuel to be order to in order to be
able to distribute that Aid throughout
all of Gaza and reaching the few 100,000
people who remain in Northern Gaza and
we also need a ceasefire in order to
assure that that humanitarians can go
and distribute that Aid and people
seeking assistance can go and access
that Aid safely and without concerns
that they will be uh killed killed while
seeking out Aid understood your
organization is one of many asking for
ceasefire one month after the conflict
started what are your
hopes you know it feels hopeless day
after day but we need to keep pushing
the International Community to demand a
ceasefire Palestinians in Gaza cannot
take it any longer each day our
colleagues tell us is the worst day of
their lives and the next day turns out
to be harder than the previous one uh a
ceasefire cannot come soon enough we
need an end to this madness we need an
end to these hostilities we need an end
to the killing and
displacement uh really I cannot stress
how much we are praying and hoping for a
ceasefire uh despite the fact that we're
hearing uh resistance coming from
Israeli
authorities our thanks uh to Shaina low
from the Norwegian Refugee Council for
your time and your
perspective thank you
well the European union says it is
stepping up its delivery of Aid to Gaza
so for more on this let's bring in DW
correspondent Rosie burchard who is
standing by for us at an airport in
Belgium ausen Brugge airport where a
plane with Aid is preparing to depart
good morning to you ra Rosie good to see
you so tell us what Aid is actually
being
sent yeah good morning from aad near the
Belgian coast and behind me
that plane is getting filled up with
humanitarian Aid mostly what I've been
told is it's nutritional supplements so
food to get to people and also Health
supplies so medicines equipment for
hospitals which we're told is really
there's a dire need for it now that
plane will be bound for Egypt where it
will be taken the stocks will be taken
by the Egyptian red crescent and then
into Gaza now the EU says it's had has
over the past month essentially
quadrupled its humanitarian Aid aid for
Palestinians and we've heard from the EU
commissioner this morning here at this
airport saying that the humanitarian
situation in Gaza is dire I asked him if
he had a message for people there and he
said he wanted to let them know that the
EU has not forgotten about them and
we'll stand by their side right well
getting Aid uh shipped is naturally a
good start Rosie but how effectively is
this reaching people in
Gaza well I spoke to a representative of
the Red Cross here and he put summed it
up really clearly he said well no a is
any use if it's stuck in a truck and so
far the figures that we've been given
here this morning are that several
hundred trucks of Aid have been able to
enter Gaza through that Rafa crossing
over the past few weeks but that was
described to me by this humanitarian
worker as simply a drop in the ocean and
we also had a persistent call a ref A
Renewed call from the eu's humanitarian
Aid Chief saying there needs to be more
humanitarian access there is not enough
there's not enough ways for them to get
Aid in so the fact that moid is being
sent obviously the EU wants to send that
message of support but also they say
they're continuing to press they say all
parties to try and let more to get more
access to so that more Aid can actually
make it to those people in that dire
need as described here by EU officials
now the United Nations has insisted on a
ceasefire where does the European Union
stand on
that well the European Union is divided
you might have heard me say this on many
other topics but really on this one EU
countries are have been battling over
this really negotiating down to every
single detail of every single word
officially the EU the European Council
so that's the member states have called
for humanitarian pauses and corridors
for humanitarian needs so essentially
pauses in fighting to let Aid in now the
commissioner here this morning who
represents the European commission so
that's the executive arm of the European
Union said it doesn't matter which word
you use whether it's a pause whether
it's a corridor whether it's a ceasefire
but of course for a divided group of
member states words really do matter and
the EU is still pretty much at odds over
this even if they have managed to
negotiate some statements so far now
there have also been what was first
described as a kind of muddled response
there was an announcement weeks ago just
in the direct aftermath of the attacks
there would be a suspension of certain
development payments that was then
backtracked on so somewhat muddled
response so far but certainly officials
here this morning trying to send one
message of support today say the people
in
Gaza thanks Rosie DW correspondent Rosie
burchard at H Belgium's aand Brugge
Airport